=================
1.Simple examples
=================
.. |br| raw:: html

    <br>

.. _Github: https://github.com/

You can download most of the example data and scripts from Github_

.. code-block:: console
  
   $ git clone --depth=1 https://github.com/pmitev/to-awk-or-not.git

Simple example
--------------

It is quite easy to use Awk from the command line to perform simple operations on text files. |br|
Suppose we have a file named "coins.txt" that describes a coin collection. Each line in the file contains the following information:

The file has the contents:

.. literalinclude:: ../01.Simple_examples/coins.txt
  :language: text

The command bellow will search through the file for lines of text that contain the string "gold", and print them out.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ awk '/gold/' coins.txt

::

   gold     1    1986  USA                 American Eagle
   gold     1    1908  Austria-Hungary     Franz Josef 100 Korona
   gold     1    1984  Switzerland         ingot
   gold     1    1979  RSA                 Krugerrand
   gold     0.5  1981  RSA                 Krugerrand
   gold     0.1  1986  PRC                 Panda
   gold     0.25 1986  USA                 Liberty 5-dollar piece
   gold     0.25 1987  USA                 Constitution 5-dollar piece
   gold     1    1988  Canada              Maple Leaf

**'/gold/'** defines a matching criteria that will be used on every line of the file. If no command is specified, the default action is to print the matched lines. 

This mimics the use of **grep** or **sed**, so why would one possibly need awk?

**Now, suppose we want to list all the coins that were minted before 1980**. We invoke Awk as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ awk '$3 < 1980 {print $3, "    ",$5,$6,$7,$8}' coins.txt

::

   1908      Franz Josef 100 Korona
   1979      Krugerrand

In the example above, we defined a matching criteria ``$3 < 1980``, so the  commands enclosed in the ``{print $3, " ",$5,$6,$7,$8}`` block **will be executed only when the criteria is met** - i.e. awk will print the values of columns 3,"    ",5,6,7, and 8. The columns are separated (defined) by white space (one ore more consecutive blanks) and addressed by the ``$`` sign i.e. ``$1`` is the value of the first column, ``$2`` - second etc. ``$0`` contains the whole line including the white spaces.

What about some math? Can I manipulate or analyze the data?
-----------------------------------------------------------



