# 1.Simple examples

## Let's begin simple
---
It is quite easy to use Awk from the command line to perform simple operations on text files. Suppose we have a file named "coins.txt" that describes a coin collection.    
Each line in the file contains the following information:

>  metal weight in ounces date minted country of origin description

The file has the contents:
``` text
gold     1    1986  USA                 American Eagle
gold     1    1908  Austria-Hungary     Franz Josef 100 Korona
silver  10    1981  USA                 ingot
gold     1    1984  Switzerland         ingot
gold     1    1979  RSA                 Krugerrand
gold     0.5  1981  RSA                 Krugerrand
gold     0.1  1986  PRC                 Panda
silver   1    1986  USA                 Liberty dollar
gold     0.25 1986  USA                 Liberty 5-dollar piece
silver   0.5  1986  USA                 Liberty 50-cent piece
silver   1    1987  USA                 Constitution dollar
gold     0.25 1987  USA                 Constitution 5-dollar piece
gold     1    1988  Canada              Maple Leaf
```

The command bellow will search through the file for lines of text that contain the string "gold", and print them out.

``` awk hl_lines="1"
$ awk '/gold/' coins.txt
gold     1    1986  USA                 American Eagle
gold     1    1908  Austria-Hungary     Franz Josef 100 Korona
gold     1    1984  Switzerland         ingot
gold     1    1979  RSA                 Krugerrand
gold     0.5  1981  RSA                 Krugerrand
gold     0.1  1986  PRC                 Panda
gold     0.25 1986  USA                 Liberty 5-dollar piece
gold     0.25 1987  USA                 Constitution 5-dollar piece
gold     1    1988  Canada              Maple Leaf
```

`#!awk /gold/` defines a matching criteria that will be used on every line of the file. If no command is specified, the default action is to print the matche
d lines.

This mimics the use of **grep** or **sed**, so why would one possibly need awk?

**Now, suppose we want to list all the coins that were minted before 1980**. We invoke Awk as follows:

``` awk hl_lines="1"
$ awk '$3 < 1980 {print $3, "    ",$5,$6,$7,$8}' coins.txt
1908      Franz Josef 100 Korona
1979      Krugerrand
```
In the example above, we defined a matching criteria `#!awk $3 < 1980`, so the  commands enclosed in the `#!awk {print $3, " ",$5,$6,$7,$8}` block **will be execut
ed only when the criteria is met** - i.e. awk will print the values of columns 3,"    ",5,6,7, and 8. The columns are separated (defined) by white space (o
ne ore more consecutive blanks) and addressed by the `#!awk $` sign i.e. `#!awk $1` is the value of the first column, `#!awk $2` - second etc. `#!awk $0` contains the whol
e line including the white spaces.


## What about some math? Can I manipulate or analyze the data?
---
Let's use the following simple file that contains 3 lines with numbers and some text, just to make our life more difficult (or maybe not?)

```
1 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 9 10 text
```
Let's try to make some calculations with the data in this file - summation and multiplication in this case.

``` awk hl_lines="1"
$ awk '       {print $1+$2*$3}' data
7
34
79
```
Again, we did not provide any matching criteria, so the commands will be executed on every line. Try to run the command. What do you think? Does awk provid
e the right answer? I am serious! ;-)
Let's do the math only if the value in the first column is greater than 4.

```awk hl_lines="1"
$ awk '$1 > 4 {print $1+$2*$3}' data
79
```
Now, `#!awk $1 > 4` is our criteria on when to execute the command block ``#!awk {print $1+$2*$3}``. Notice that the criteria is outside the ``#!awk {}`` block.

## Awk command-line syntax:
---
``` awk
$ awk ' /pattern/ {action} ' file1 file2 ... fileN
```

* **action** is performed on every line that matches **pattern**.
* If **pattern** is not provided, action is performed on every line.
* If **action** is not provided, then all matching lines are simply sent to standard output.
* Since **patterns** and **actions** are optional, actions must be enclosed in braces to distinguish them from pattern.
* The statements in an awk program may be indented and formatted using spaces, tabs, and new lines.
* Two special patterns: `#!awk BEGIN` (execute an action before first input line) and `#!awk END` ( ... after all lines are read.)

## Simple output examples
---
  `#!awk { print }` - will print the whole line to standard out

  `#!awk { print $0 }` - will do the same thing

  `#!awk { print $1, $3 }` - expressions separated by a comma are, by default, separated by a single space when output

  `#!awk { print NF, $1, $NF }` - will print the number of fields, the first field, and the last field in the current record

  `#!awk { print $(NF-2) }` prints the third to last field

  
## Computing and Printing
---
  `#!awk { print $1, $2 * $3 }` You can also do computations on the field values and include the results in your output

  `#!awk { print NR, $0 }` - will print each line prefixed with its line number


## Putting Text in the Output
---
  `#!awk { print "total pay for", $1, "is", $2 * $3 }` you can also add other text to the output besides what is in the current record. Note that the inserted
text needs to be surrounded by double quotes.

  `#!awk { printf("total pay for %s is $%.2f\n", $1, $2 * $3) }` when using printf, formatting is under your control, so no automatic spaces or newlines are pr
ovided by awk. You have to insert them yourself.

  `#!awk { printf("%-8s %6.2f\n", $1, $2 * $3 ) }` - well, this escalated too fast...

More on format modifers: [gawk documentation](https://https://www.gnu.org/software/gawk/manual/html_node/Format-Modifiers.html#Format-Modifiers)

!!! example "Files"
    * [coins.txt](data/coins.txt)
